I

The road to Hastings is measured from what, in these times, seems the
unlikely starting-point of London Bridge, and is identical with the
Dover Road as far as New Cross, where it turns to the right and goes
through Lewisham, the Dover Road continuing by Deptford and Blackheath.

Few would now choose such a starting-point for a journey to Hastings,
but there is reason in most things, and when this road was first
travelled there was a very special reason for this choice. London
Bridge was, until 1750, the only bridge that crossed the Thames between
London and Putney, and the sole way to the southern counties therefore
lay through Southwark.

But in those comparatively early times the historian finds no mention
of the “Hastings” Road at all. Travellers very rarely wanted to
journey from London to that fisher village; and it is the road to Rye
for which the inquirer after these things must look in the classic
seventeenth-century pages of Ogilby’s “Britannia.” In that very
elaborate and accurate work, published in 1675, the Hastings Road
appears as the “road to Rye,” and thus, after Flimwell, 44¾ miles down,
where it makes as straight as may be for that once-busy port, the
chance pilgrim for Hastings had to find his way across country as best
he could by the directions of the country folk.

It is twenty miles from Flimwell to Hastings, and as I do not suppose
the rustics were nearly so well informed then as now as to routes and
distances, and as their knowledge on those matters is even now not
profound, I think we shall do well to feel sorry for that wayfarer of
long ago, thus left without a guide.

By the time the coaching age had arrived, and the road-books of Cary
and Paterson and a host of others began to be published, the “Hastings”
Road, rather than the road to Rye, had been invented, but still the way
lay over London Bridge, and was measured from the south side of it,
whence the distance is 63½ miles.

The traveller of to-day would probably find Westminster Bridge Road,
St. George’s Road, and the New Kent Road the best way out of London,
but it will be allowed that the best is bad.

As the imagination—whatever may be the facts—refuses to associate
the Borough High Street and the Old Kent Road with the sylvan
beauties of the road to Hastings, I do not propose here to recount the
description of those beginnings, given already in the pages of the
DOVER ROAD; but will, as Astley of the Circus suggested to the mere
dramatist, literally “cut the cackle and come to the ’osses,” _i.e._, a
consideration of the coaching history of the road.

II

The history of coaching on the Hastings Road will never be fully
written. There are too few materials for it. None of the great critics
of coaching—men of the eminence of “Nimrod” or “Viator Junior”—ever
wrote about the Hastings Road, for it was a road of many pair-horse
coaches, and “pair-horse concerns” were considered beneath the notice
of those lofty writers. Even the Royal Mail was a “pair-horse concern,”
and was looked down upon accordingly.

It is as the road to Sevenoaks, to Tonbridge, and to the “Wells” that
we first hear of this route in the coaching way; and, as ever, we hear
first of the carriers and their waggons. Goods were conveyed on wheels
long before travellers, and the heavy, cumbrous wains, drawn by eight
or ten horses, and rarely going three miles an hour, carried heavy
merchandise and the poorest kind of wayfarers quite a century before
the horsemen, riding singly or with their ladies on a pillion behind
them, took to what was at first considered the “effeminate” practice of
riding in coaches.

Thus the early glimpses of the road reveal Nathaniel Field, carrier,
plying in 1681 between Tonbridge and the “Queen’s Head” Inn, Southwark,
once a week, together with another carrier, unnamed, a competitor in
the business. In the same year “Richard Cockett’s Waggon” came twice
weekly to the “Spur,” Southwark, from “Sunnock, in Kent”; and from
“Brumly in Kent” came thrice a week “Widow Ingerham’s Waggon,” to the
“King’s Arms in Barnaby Street, Southwark,” together with “William and
Daniel Woolf’s Waggon,” on the same days.

There is sufficient evidence in the diary of Samuel Jeake, junior,
of Rye, that there was no coach further than Tonbridge, or Tunbridge
Wells, in 1682; for he tells us that, journeying from Rye to London
on May 22nd of that year, “I rode with my wife and mother-in-law for
diversion, and came thither on the 23rd; had hot and dry weather.”
Returning on June 23rd, they went “from London in the stage-coach to
Tonbridge; and on the 24th, Saturday, came to Rye at night.”

On January 23rd, 1686, he went to London by himself. Starting from Rye
at 8.30 a.m., he rode the twenty-three miles to Lamberhurst by 2 p.m.
Refreshing there for an hour, he resumed his journey, in company with
others, for the security afforded by numbers, and between Woodgate and
Tonbridge, in the moonlight, the tracks being very bad and uneven,
he and another became separated from the party, and immediately lost
themselves. It was freezing hard. He alighted and led his horse, until
at last, coming to a pretty good track, he remounted, and by the grace
of God and at a very late hour came into Tonbridge.

Whether this adventure was due partly to the good cheer of the
“Chequers” at Lamberhurst, or wholly to the uncertainty of the track,
it would be rash to say. But it is all very vivid to me: the brushwood
alleys, the rimy branches of the shrouded woods, the clear, cold
radiance of the frosty moon, the iron-hard ruts, and the breath arising
like steam from Mr. Samuel Jeake and his horse; but most real to me
his joy when he saw at last, at the foot of Somerhill, the lights of
Tonbridge town.

Next morning he left Tonbridge for London, and—being by himself—rode
horseback all the way, performing the journey of thirty miles in ten
hours.

The stage-coach of 1682, in which the worthy Samuel Jeake brought his
wife and mother-in-law, went no further than Tunbridge Wells. It was
probably, even at that date, no new thing, for the “happy springs of
Tunbridge” had long been known, and had for some years been gaining
popularity among real or fancied invalids. We may well suppose it to
have been started somewhere about 1650.

III

With the dawn of the nineteenth century the service of coaches between
London and Hastings begins to take some definite shape. In 1807
Robert Gray, of the “Bolt-in-Tun,” Fleet Street, horsed the Hastings
Mail, and continued for many years. In 1828 it was jointly run by
Gray and by Benjamin Worthy Horne, of the “Golden Cross.” Being only
a “pair-horse” mail, it was, like its fellows in the same category,
very slow. The Brighton, Portsmouth, and Hastings mails were, in
fact, the three slowest in the kingdom, and of these the Brighton was
the worst laggard. The mails, it should be explained, to correct the
impression created by the eloquence of De Quincey and Hazlitt, were not
_necessarily_ faster than the stage-coaches. In some instances they
were: in others they were not. Everything depended upon individual
cases, and much upon distance. Where great distances had to be
covered the speed would be very high, as in the Bristol, Devonport
(“Quicksilver”), and Birmingham mails, of which the first averaged
considerably over ten miles an hour; but in cases such as these of
Hastings, Portsmouth, and Brighton, all the night lay before them, and
the short distance could be taken very easily with pair-horse teams;
while the four-horse teams running to the West and North were always
upon their mettle, to keep their time-bills. The speed of the Hastings
Mail in 1837, its best period, averaged eight miles an hour; and that
in itself was a great advance from 1828, when the pace was under seven
miles an hour.

Mail-coaches were, therefore, not always the most dashing public
equipages of the King’s Highway. From about 1825, when the “fast”
day-coaches and the post-coaches began to set the pace, the mail on the
Hastings Road was for a time left hopelessly behind. In 1826 the “Royal
William,” starting from the “George and Blue Boar,” Holborn, at 9 a.m.,
was at Hastings by 5 o’clock: speed rather more than eight miles an
hour. Prodigious!

But that rate was very poor in comparison with the stage-coaches of
almost every other road, and even in 1828, the Golden Age of coaching,
proprietors, in announcing “Hastings to London in Eight Hours” appear
to have considered themselves wonderful fellows. Indeed, on the
old coaching bills of this period, discovered in 1893, during some
alterations, on the walls of a building in Castle Street, Hastings, one
coach-proprietor had the impudence (as we must think it) of setting
forth “Hastings to London in 9 hours!” He did well to conclude with
that exclamation-mark, although he placed it there in a different sense
from that in which we read it.